A comparative study on computational methods to
solve tangram puzzles
Fernanda Miyuki Yamada
Center for Mathematics, Computing and Cognition
Federal University of ABC
Santo Andre, Brazil
Email: fernanda.yamada@aluno.ufabc.edu.br
Harlen Costa Batagelo
Center for Mathematics, Computing and Cognition
Federal University of ABC
Santo Andre, Brazil
Email: harlen.batagelo@ufabc.edu.br
Abstract—The tangram is a dissection puzzle composed of
seven polygonal pieces which can be combined to form different
patterns. Besides being a recreational puzzle, the tangram relates
to a more general class of combinatorial NP-hard problems such
as the bin packing problem and jigsaw puzzles. In this paper, we
propose a comparative study of current computational methods
for automatically solving tangram puzzles. In particular, we
propose to implement and compare four approaches that employ
strategies based on computational heuristics, genetic algorithms,
artificial neural networks and algebraic representations. We in-
tend to identify their similarities, their strengths and weaknesses
in order to better understand the tangram puzzle problem,
ultimately leading to an improved computational method for
solving dissection puzzles.
I. INTRODUCTION
The tangram is a geometric puzzle composed by seven
polygonal pieces: a square, a parallelogram, and five triangles
of different sizes. In Figure 1, the pieces are presented in their
initial square configuration.
Fig. 1. Tangram pieces in the initial configuration.
The goal of the tangram puzzle is to rearrange the seven
pieces using rigid body transformations in order to fit them into
a given pattern composed of simply-connected or multiply-
connected planar regions [1]. All seven pieces must be used
and they may not overlap. When the pieces contact each other,
vertex-to-vertex, vertex-to-edge, and edge-to-edge contacts are
allowed. The tangram puzzle relates to a more general class
of combinatorial problems such as the bin packing problem
and the jigsaw puzzle problem, both of which are known to
be NP-hard problems.
In this study, we present preliminary results of a compar-
ative study of existing computational techniques for solving
tangram puzzles. Our goal is to identify the advantages and
weaknesses of each method in order to identify room for
improvement of techniques for solving dissection puzzles. We
focus on four approaches which include methods developed
solely for tangram puzzles, but also methods originally devel-
oped for jigsaw or edge-matching puzzles that can be extended
to tangram puzzles. So far, we have implemented and analyzed
the heuristic approach described by Deutsch & Hayes [2].
In Section II we present a synthesis of the literature
of computational tangram solving techniques. A preliminary
comparison considering what the authors presented in their
works is presented in Section III. In Section IV we present our
methodology to conduct the implementation and comparison.
Preliminary results of our implementation of the heuristic
method are presented and discussed in Section V.
II. COMPUTATIONAL METHODS TO SOLVE TANGRAM
PUZZLES
Most computational puzzle solving techniques are dedicated
to jigsaw [3] and edge-matching [4] puzzles. From these
techniques, we have identified two approaches which include
extensions to dissection puzzles such as the tangram: one
based on genetic algorithms [5], and a more recent approach
based on the solution of systems of polynomial equations
derived from the pieces of the puzzle [6]. According to our sur-
vey, only two methods were proposed exclusively for tangram
puzzles: an approach based on heuristic programming [2] and
a technique based on neural networks [7]. Since the study of
these techniques is the main objective of this paper, we present
a brief overview of these works in the following subsections.
A. Method based on heuristic programming
Deutsch & Hayes [2] presented two approaches to solve
tangram puzzles. The first one is a combinatorial approach, in
which the algorithm tests various possibilities of positioning
the pieces and, by trial and error, finds the desired solution.
Its obvious drawback is the high processing time, since the
problem deals with a large solution space. In order to tackle
that, the authors focus on a proposal based on heuristic
programming. Initially, the algorithm performs attempts to
partition a desired polygonal pattern into smaller parts called
sub-puzzles. The algorithm follows the contour of the pattern
and, in convex corners (from internal angles), generates so-
called extension lines that determine a possible section of the
pattern. In Figure 2, extension lines are shown as dashed lines.
sub-puzzle 1
sub-puzzle 2
sub-puzzle 1
sub-puzzle 2Fig. 2. Example of the pattern partition into sub-puzzles [2].
In order to separate the pattern into sub-puzzles, the method
applies ten rules that consider the relation between the edges
of the pattern and the extension lines with the pieces and the
composites, which are regions formed by a set of pieces. Two
of these rules summarize the general idea of the algorithm and
are presented in the following paragraphs.
According to the direct-match rule, the method must first
find pieces entirely described by edges instead of extension
lines or combinations of edges with extension lines.
The 21/2 − 31/2 edge-match rule requires that in the case
of triangular shapes, two sides must be completely defined by
edges, while the remaining side can be defined by a combi-
nation of collinear edges and extension lines. In addition, the
combination should include at least a part of an edge. Also,
for four-sided pieces, the rule requires that the additional side
is also fully described by an edge. In the end, it is expected
to fit the pieces into the formed sub-puzzles. An advantage of
this approach is its simplicity of implementation.
The algorithm rearranges the pieces correctly for most
examples presented in the original paper, but the authors
present cases in which it is not possible to obtain satisfactory
results. In addition, the approach is limited to patterns without
holes and only allows rotations of pieces by angles at multiples
of 45 degrees.
B. Method based on neural networks
Oflazer [7] presents a computational technique to the place-
ment of tangram pieces based on a non-restricted Boltzmann
Machine [8]. The pieces are initially laid out on a regular grid.
Possible positions and rotations are represented by neural units
that receive excitatory connections (Exc) from input units that
define the puzzle, and lateral inhibitory (Inh) connections of
conflicting units. Figure 3 shows a representation of the neuron
used to define the position and orientation of a tangram piece.
The sum of the inputs determine the output according to the
logistic probability function for Boltzmann Machines.
Oflazer presents tests performed over ten patterns commonly
used in the tangram puzzle. According to the author, the
method succeeds and converges in a few hundred iterations.
However, it limits the rotations of pieces by angles at multiples
of 45 degrees due to the regular grid.
C. Method based on genetic algorithm
Bartonˇek [5] presents an evolutionist approach for solving
polygonal jigsaw puzzles [3]. This method presents an ex-
tension for the solution of tangram puzzles in which pieces
are represented by string codes. In a string code, the edgesΣ = Exc
Σ = Inh
Inhibitory
inputs
from conflicting
units
Excitatory inputs
grid units defining
the puzzle
Output
Fig. 3. Representation of a neural unit used in the work of Oflazer representing
a single placement and orientation of a tangram piece [7].
and angles are represented by integer numbers invariant to
rigid body transformations, as shown in Figure 4. Based on
the theory of cluster analysis [9], each piece is assigned to a
certain group according to the calculated similarity between
the piece and the other pieces belonging to the same group
based on its string codes. An evaluation function (fitness)
determines how many groups the pieces will be divided into.i.fragmen t
a i1
d i2
a i2
d i3
a i3
d i1
String code of i.fragment :
di1, ai1, di2, ai2, di3, ai3=
√2, 45°, 1, 90°, 1, 45°.
Fig. 4. Tangram piece represented by string codes [5]. The piece i is
represented by the sequence dij aij , in which dij represents the length of
the edge and aij represents the angle formed by dij and dij+1.
D. Method based on algebraic concepts
Kovalsky et al. [6] present a method for solving jigsaw
puzzles in terms of algebraic concepts. The puzzle is modeled
as a system of polynomial equations so that any solution of the
system is a solution of the puzzle as a complete representation.
The authors first propose to solve edge-matching puzzles.
However, they show how to apply their approach to tangram
puzzles by considering the tangram as an edge-matching
puzzle in which all pieces have the same color. Figure 5 shows
an example of the application of this method. In that example,
the orientation of each piece is fixed. The authors argue that the
method can be modified to assimilate the solution of puzzles
with rotations, although limited to a discrete set of rotations.
III. PRELIMINARY COMPARISON
A tangram puzzle solving technique must be able to solve
at least the simplest tangram puzzles which can be fully
characterized by a set of translations and discrete rotations
to form a pattern composed of a simply-connected polygon.
Fig. 5. Example of the technique developed by Kovalsky et al. applied to
the tangram [6]. In the first row, the pieces in the initial configuration (left),
the desired pattern (center) and the arrangement obtained (right). The second
and third rows show the intermediate stages of the solution of the system of
equations.
However, it is desired that a tangram puzzle solving technique
be able to solve more complex tangram puzzles. These may be
composed of multiply-connected regions, possibly with holes.
In addition, they may require non-discrete rotations, as well
as the reflection (flip) operation for the parallelogram. Table I
summarizes the main aspects and limitations of each approach
as claimed by their authors.
TABLE I
PRELIMINARY COMPARISON OF COMPUTATIONAL METHODS TO SOLVE
TANGRAM PUZZLES
Methods
Discrete
rotations
only?
Allow
reflection
operations?
Solve
patterns
with
holes?
Solve
patterns with
multiply-
connected
regions?
Deutsch
& Hayes Yes Yes No No
Oflazer Yes Yes Yes No
Bartonek Yes No No No
Kovalsky Yes No No No
Our first analysis shows that the neural network method
by Oflazer is more flexible in the sense of solving the
tangram puzzle for patterns with holes and patterns which
require the parallelogram reflection transformation. However,
all the aforementioned approaches show limitations with re-
spect to piece orientation, usually limiting rotations to a
discrete set of multiples of 45 degrees. In addition, none of
the approaches proved to be applicable in the solution of
patterns with multiply-connected regions. We consider that
the information contained in the corresponding papers are
not sufficient to establish a comparison of performance and
obtained arrangements between the approaches. Therefore,
we propose to conduct a comparative study between these
methods by implementing them and performing puzzle solving
tests on a common set of test cases.
IV. METHODOLOGY
The methods will be implemented and evaluated in a
common test bed. In the following, we present an overview of
our proposed test cases and comparison criteria.
A. Test cases
We will use a common set of test cases covering different
configurations such as patterns with perfect fit of pieces,
patterns with missing pieces, patterns with spare pieces and
patterns with holes. To better understand the limitations on the
rotation of the pieces, the test cases will include patterns that
do not require piece rotation, patterns that can be obtained
through a discrete set of multiples of 45-degree orientations,
and patterns in which the pieces are not limited to a discrete set
of rotations. Furthermore, we will consider cases that require
the reflection transformation of the parallelogram.
B. Comparison criteria
We will consider a set of quantitative and qualitative aspects
for an initial comparative analysis. For quantitative aspects, we
plan to include performance metrics such as processing time
and memory consumption, and coverage metrics such as the
area of the pattern covered and exceeded by the pieces. Qual-
itative aspects should include the identification of conceptual
limitations of each approach, difficulty of implementation, the
ability to obtain approximate or partial results, identification
of cases that could not be solved, qualification of the obtained
results by checking the occurrence of overlapping pieces, use
of all pieces and occurrence of space between pairs of pieces.
After this first stage of analysis, the qualitative and quanti-
tative results obtained will be discussed in order clarify some
points. First, we will consider in which aspects each approach
is superior or inferior compared to the others. Then, we can
determine if there are limitations that no technique was able
to solve. After that, we can determine what are the general
limitations of the problem of solving tangram puzzles using
computational techniques. Furthermore, we can verify if there
are techniques applied to other types of planar puzzles that
can solve the identified limitations.
V. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
We started our study by the heuristic technique proposed
by Deutsch & Hayes, in which the authors propose to solve
tangram puzzles using simple placement and extraction rules.
We have obtained preliminary results over the extension
lines generation procedure. Figure 6 shows the tangram puz-
zles solutions and the extension lines obtained for each desired
pattern. The desired patterns (i.e. the puzzle outlines) are
shown as green lines. Concave-type vertices are shown as
red dots. Convex-type vertices are shown as blue dots, and
the obtained extension lines are shown as dashed blue lines.
All pieces and composites can be placed along the extension
lines and edges of the puzzle outline. Therefore, as the
authors suggested, we can obtain each puzzle solution by using
combinations of sub-puzzles separated by the extension lines
to fit the pieces.
According to the authors, the heuristic method cannot solve
for patterns with holes. Also, we noticed that the method
cannot solve for patterns composed by multiply-connected
regions. In order to overcome this limitation, we propose to
perform a preprocessing operation in which the pattern is
partitioned in two or more sub-puzzles. After obtaining the
pattern outline, we consider each vertex of the contour by
starting with the top-leftmost vertex and proceeding in the
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 6. Tangram puzzles solutions and results of the extension lines generation
procedure. (a) Tangram “robot” puzzle solution; (b) Tangram “robot” puzzle
extension lines; (c) Tangram “running person” puzzle solution; (d) Tangram
“running person” puzzle extension lines.
clockwise direction. If we find two vertices that share the same
coordinates, we extract the outline vertices located between
these two vertices and consider them as a separated sub-puzzle.
Then, we apply the extension lines extraction procedure in
each obtained sub-puzzle and in the remaining pattern outline.
Preliminary results of the preprocessing operation and the
obtained representation and extension lines are shown in
Figure 7.
(a) (b)
Fig. 7. Preprocessing operation considering patterns composed of multiple
contours. (a) Tangram “praying person” puzzle solution; (b) Tangram “praying
person” puzzle extension lines.
VI. FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
In this paper, we present preliminary results of an ongoing
comparative study of four computational methods to solve
tangram puzzles based on computational heuristics, genetic
algorithms, artificial neural networks and algebraic represen-
tations.
Although the literature related to computational methods for
solving jigsaw and edge-matching puzzles is broad, the de-
velopment of computational techniques for solving dissection
puzzles in particular is still a barely explored field. Among
the approaches identified in the literature, only the techniques
proposed by Deutsch & Hayes and Oflazer are designed for
solving tangram puzzles. The others are variations of jigsaw
and edge-matching puzzle techniques in which the authors
present adaptations for their use in tangram puzzles, usually
with limitations.
We presented our implementation of the extension lines
generation procedure presented in the heuristic method pro-
posed by Deutsch & Hayes. So far, the obtained results are
satisfactory and the procedure has proved efficient in the
puzzle partitioning process. We have proposed a modification
on the method in order to extract the extension lines from
patterns composed by multiply-connected regions.
We intend to propose further improvements for cases not
covered by the original method by Deutsch & Hayes, as well as
to implement the other approaches identified in the literature.
In addition, during the development of this research, we aim to
identify the advantages and limitations of each approach and
propose possibilities of improvement for new computational
methods to solve dissection puzzles.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been supported by CAPES (Brazilian
Coordination for Improvement of Higher Level Personnel).
REFERENCES
[1] J. E. C. Castanho and C. L. Tozzi, “Obtenc¸ ˜ao da transformac¸ ˜ao de
corpo r´ıgido em registro de imagens com deformac¸ ˜ao usando thin plate
splines,” in Anais..., L. Velho, A. d. Albuquerque, and R. A. Lotufo,
Eds., Simp´osio Brasileiro de Computac¸ ˜ao Gr´afica e Processamento
de Imagens, 9. (SIBGRAPI). Porto Alegre: Sociedade Brasileira de
Computac¸ ˜ao, 1996, Aplicac¸ ˜oes em Medicina, pp. 181–187. [Online].
Available: http://urlib.net/dpi.inpe.br/ambro/1998/04.27.11.28
[2] E. S. Deutsch and K. C. Hayes Jr., “A heuristic solution to the tangram
puzzle,” Machine Intelligence, vol. 7, pp. 205–240, 1972.
[3] F. A. Andal´o, G. Taubin, and S. Goldenstein, “Solving image puzzles with
a simple quadratic programming formulation,” in Proceedings..., C. M.
D. S. Freitas, S. Sarkar, R. Scopigno, and L. Silva, Eds., Conference on
Graphics, Patterns and Images, 25. (SIBGRAPI). Los Alamitos: IEEE
Computer Society Conference Publishing Services, 2012.
[4] E. D. Demaine and M. L. Demaine, “Jigsaw puzzles, edge matching, and
polyomino packing: Connections and complexity,” Graphs and Combi-
natorics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 195–208, 2007.
[5] D. Bartonˇek, “A genetic algorithm how to solve a puzzle and its using
in cartography,” Acta Scientiarum Polonorum. Geodesia et Descriptio
Terrarum, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 15–23, 2005.
[6] S. Z. Kovalsky, D. Glasner, and R. Basri, “A global approach for solving
edge-matching puzzles,” SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences, vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 916–938, 2015.
[7] K. Oflazer, “Solving tangram puzzles: A connectionist approach,” Inter-
national journal of intelligent systems, vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 603–616, 1993.
[8] R. Salakhutdinov and G. E. Hinton, “Deep boltzmann machines.” in
AISTATS, vol. 1, 2009, p. 3.
[9] M. R. Anderberg, Cluster analysis for applications: probability and
mathematical statistics: a series of monographs and textbooks. Academic
press, 2014, vol. 19.